# A competition math problem
### The problem

>For a positive integer $n$, let $f_n(x) = cos(x) cos(2x) cos(3x)··· cos(nx)$.   
>Find the smallest $n$ such that $| f_n'' (0)| > 2023$.  

This is problem A1 from the 2023 Putnam Math Competition.  
For a test where the median score tends to be 0/120, I'm surprised at how doable this seems.  
I'm not formally trained in math, so I won't be proving anything, but I'll try to use sound logic.  
### First Observation
An important observation is that the problem only cares about the case when $x=0$ so any $cos(nx) = 1$ and any $sin(nx) = 0$  

### Simple Cases
To begin to approach this problem I like to start with the simplest cases and add complexity  

For $n=1$  
$f_1(x) = cos(x)$  
$f_1'(x)=-sin(x)$  
$f_1''(x) = -cos(x)$  

$|f_1''(0)| = |-cos(0)|=1$  
 
Seems simple enough for now  

For $n = 2$  
$f_2(x) = cos(x)cos(2x)$  
$f_2'(x)=-2cos(x)sin(2x)-sin(x)cos(2x)$  
$f_2''(x) = -4cos(x)cos(2x)+2sin(x)sin(2x)-cos(x)cos(2x)+2sin(x)sin(2x)$  

$|f_2''(0)|=|-4cos(0)cos(0)-cos(0)cos(0)|=5$  

This looks like it's going to grow fairly quickly  

Let's try $n=3$  
At this step, I noticed that we can write the function recursively  
$f_3(x) = f_2(x)cos(3x)$  
$f_3'(x) = f_2'(x)cos(3x)-3f_2(x)sin(3x)$  
$f_3''(x) = f_2''(x)cos(3x)-3f_2'(x)sin(3x)-3f_2'(x)sin(3x)-9f_2(x)cos(3x)$  

Now plugging in zero yields  
$|f_3''(0)| = |f_2''(0)-9|=14$  

### A proposed pattern
From these three cases I suspect that function is related to the sum of squares:  

Let's confirm this by taking derivatives of a general case:  
$f_n(x) = f_{n-1}(x) \cos(nx)$`  
$f_{n}'(x)=f_{n-1}'(x)\cos(nx)-nf_{{n-1}}(x)\sin(nx)$
$f_{n}''(x)=f_{{n-1}}''(x)\cos(nx)-nf_{{n-1}}'(x)\sin(nx)-nf_{{n-1}}'(x)\sin(nx)-n^{2}f_{{n-1}}(x)\cos(nx)$ 

So  
$|f_{n}''(0)|=|f_{{n-1}}''(0)-n^{2}|$ 
This is enough confirmation for me to believe that  
$|f_{n}''(0)|=\sum_{k=1}^{n}k^{2}$ holds for every $n∈ℕ$

### Solving the problem
I think the following rule for the sum of squares is useful here:   
$\sum_{k=1}^{n}k^{2}=\frac{n(n+1)(2n+1)}{6}$

But I couldn't remember or derive this formula when I was solving this problem, so I ended up summing the squares by hand. This was annoying, but a small price to pay for the satisfaction of solving a Putnam problem.  

Since  
$|f_{17}''(0)|=1785$ and $|f_{18}''(0)|=2109$  

The smallest $n$ such that $| f_n'' (0)| > 2023$ is $n=18$

### Wrapping Up
Hard math problems are a pain, but are incredibly satisfying to complete. I don't currently have a goal in mind for using the math skills I learn outside of the engineering curriculum and I do this purely for fun. I might write about more problems in the future, maybe from the AMC 12 tests that I usually do instead of the Putnam.
